# Simulation Output Overview

In this section we define and provide an overview of the output generated by a
VMC simulation performed using the [VariationalMC.jl](https://github.com/atanjaro/VariationalMC.jl) package.


## Output Data Folder Structure

Each simulation performed with [VariationalMC.jl](https://github.com/atanjaro/VariationalMC.jl) will generate a directory
with a user defined name that all the output of the simulation will be written to. Here we will simply refer to
this top-level directory as the `datafolder`, but again, the user may call it whatever they like.
Inside the `datafolder` a set of files and folders resembling the structure outlined below will be found;
note the CSV files will only be present if results are exported to CSV files as the default storage format is
HDF5 files:

- `[datafolder]`: 
  - `model_summary.toml`: A TOML file that describes the Hamiltonian that was simulated, and defines the various types of IDs that measurements are reported in terms of.
  - `simulation_info_pID*_sID*.toml`: A TOML file reporting basic information about the simulation, including the version of Julia and [VariationalMC.jl](https://github.com/atanjaro/VariationalMC.jl) that was used to run the simulation. An `[metadata]` table contains the contents of a user defined dictionary as well. One such file is generated for each `pID` MPI rank if multiple simulations are being performed in parallel using MPI.
  - `stats.h5`: HDF5 file containing computed measurement statistics.
  - `[opt_bins]`: Directory containing binned optimization measurement data stored in HDF5 files.
    - `bins_pID-0.h5`: HDF5 file containing the binned measurement data associated with `pID = 0`.
    - `bins_pID-1.h5`: HDF5 file containing the binned measurement data associated with `pID = 1`.
    - `[...]`
  - `[sim_bins]`: Directory containing binned simulation measurement data stored in HDF5 files.
    - `bins_pID-0.h5`: HDF5 file containing the binned measurement data associated with `pID = 0`.
    - `bins_pID-1.h5`: HDF5 file containing the binned measurement data associated with `pID = 1`.
    - `[...]`
  - `global_stats.csv`: CSV file containing final average and error for all global measurements.
  - `local_stats.csv`: CSV file containing final average and error for all local measurements.
  - `[equal-time]`: Top-level directory containing all equal-time correlation function measurement results.
    - `[density]`: As an example, directory containing equal-time density-density correlations.
      - `density_momentum_equal-time_stats.csv`: CSV file containing average and error for density-density correlation in momentum space.
      - `density_position_equal-time_stats.csv`: CSV file containing average and error for density-density correlation in position space.
    - `[...]`

## Model Summary

The function `model_summary` is used to a TOML file named `model_summary.toml` that full describes
and parameterizes the initial Hamiltonian simulated in a VMC simulation using [VariationalMC.jl](https://github.com/atanjaro/VariationalMC.jl).
Significantly, this method also defines the types of IDs
(`ORBITAL_ID`, `BOND_ID`, `HOPPING_ID`) that
the various measurements are reported in terms of. The type of ID used to report correlation and local measurements are recorded in
the exported dictionaries `CORRELATION_FUNCTIONS` and `LOCAL_MEASUREMENTS`.
    
## Uncertainty Reporting Conventions

The average value $\bar{C}$ for any measured expectation value $\langle C \rangle$ is reported as a complex number in all  `*_stats.csv` files,
even if it is known formally to be a strictly real quantity.
On the other hand, the error, or standard deviation, associated with each measurement is reported as a strictly positive real number such that
the error associated with the complex expectation value $\langle C \rangle$ is given by $\Delta C = \sqrt{\Delta C_{\rm Re}^2 + \Delta C_{\rm Im}^2}$.

## Global Measurements

At the end of a simulation once the measurements are processed using the `process_measurements`
method, a file `global_stats.csv` file is created that contains the final estimates and errors for all "global" measurements.
The corresponding binned global data is stored as binary HDF5 files in either the `opt_bins` or `sim_bins` directories.
We define each global measurement below.

- `density`: Average global total charge density $\langle n \rangle = \langle n_\uparrow \rangle + \langle n_\downarrow \rangle$.
- `double_occ`: Average global double occupancy $\langle n_\uparrow n_\downarrow \rangle$.
- `energy_per_site`: Average global energy per site $\langle E\rangle/N$.
- `spin-z`: Average global z-component of spin $\langle S^z\rangle = \langle n_\uparrow - n_\downarrow\rangle/2$.

## Local Measurement

At the end of a simulation once the measurements are processed using the `process_measurements`
method, a file `local_stats.csv` file is created that contains the final estimates and errors for all "local" measurements.
The corresponding binned local data is stored as binary HDF5 files in either the `opt_bins` or `sim_bins` directories.
All "local" measurements are reported in terms of an ID type, defined in the `model_summary.toml` file generated by
the `model_summary` function. The definition for each local measurement that may be reported,
including the type of ID it is reported in terms of, is defined below.

- `density`: (`ORBITAL_ID`) The charge density $\langle n_{\nu} \rangle = \langle n_{\uparrow,\nu} \rangle + \langle n_{\downarrow,\nu} \rangle$ for orbital $\nu$ in the unit cell.
- `double_occ`: (`ORBITAL_ID`) The double-occupance $\langle n_{\uparrow,\nu} n_{\downarrow,\nu} \rangle$ for orbital $\nu$ in the unit cell.
- `spin-z`: (`ORBITAL_ID`) The z-component of spin $\langle S^z_\nu\rangle = \langle n_{\uparrow, \nu} - n_{\downarrow,\nu}\rangle/2$ for orbital $\nu$ in the unit cell.

### Local Tight-Binding Measurements

- `hopping_energy`: (`HOPPING_ID`) The total hopping energy $-\sum_{\sigma} \langle t_{l,\sigma,(\mathbf{i}+\mathbf{r},\nu),(\mathbf{i},\gamma)} c^\dagger_{\sigma,\mathbf{i}+\mathbf{r},\nu} c^{\phantom\dagger}_{\sigma,\mathbf{i},\gamma} + {\rm h.c.} \rangle$ for a hopping connecting orbitals $\gamma$ and $\nu$ displaced $\mathbf{r}$ unit cells, where $t_{l,(\mathbf{i}+\mathbf{r},\nu),(\mathbf{i},\gamma)}$ is the hopping amplitude.

### Local Hubbard Measurements

- `hubbard_energy`: (`ORBITAL_ID`) The Hubbard interaction energy $U_{\nu} \langle n_{\uparrow,\nu} n_{\downarrow,\nu} \rangle$ for orbital $\nu$ in the unit cell.
- `extended_hubbard_energy`: (`ORBITAL_ID`) The extended Hubbard interaction energy $V_{\nu} \langle n_{\mathbf{i},\gamma} n_{\mathbf{i}+\mathbf{r},\nu} \rangle$ connecting orbitals $\gamma$ and $\nu$ displaced $\mathbf{r}$ unit cells.

## Correlation Function Measurements

Let $\hat{O}_{\mathbf{i},\nu}$ represent some operator associated with unit cell $\mathbf{i}$ and ID index $\nu$.
For instance, in the case of a density-density correlation, $\nu$ corresponds to an `ORBITAL_ID` index.
The only type of correlation that may be reported is the `equal-time` correlation function of the form
```math
C_{\nu,\gamma}(\mathbf{r}) = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{\mathbf{i}} \langle O^{\dagger}_{\mathbf{i}+\mathbf{r},\nu} O^{\phantom\dagger}_{\mathbf{i},\gamma} \rangle
```
in `position` space, where the sum over $\mathbf{i}$ runs over all unit cells, and $\mathbf{r}$ represents a displacement in
unit cells. The corresponding `equal-time` correlation function in `momentum` space is given by
```math
C_{\nu,\gamma}(\mathbf{q}) = \sum_\mathbf{r} e^{-{\rm i}\mathbf{q}\cdot(\mathbf{r}+\mathbf{r}_\nu-\mathbf{r}_\gamma)} C_{\nu,\gamma}(\mathbf{r}),
```
where $\mathbf{r}_\nu$ and $\mathbf{r}_\gamma$ are static displacement vector associated with the operators $\hat{O}_{\mathbf{i},\nu}$ and $\hat{O}_{\mathbf{i},\gamma}$. For instance, in the case of the density-density correlation, $\mathbf{r}_\nu$ is the location of the orbital $\nu$ in the unit cell.

### Displacement Vector and Momentum Reporting Conventions

Consider a $D$ dimensional finite periodic lattice, where $\mathbf{a}_d$ and $\mathbf{b}_d$ denote the corresponding lattice vectors and reciprocal lattice vectors, where $d \in [1,D]$.
The extent of the lattice in unit cells in the direction of each of the lattice vectors is denoted by $L_d$.
Given these definitions, the displacement vectors are parametetized as
```math
\mathbf{r} = \sum_{d=1}^D \mathtt{R}_d \mathbf{a}_d,
```
and then reported in terms of the set of integers $\mathtt{R}_d \in [0, L_d)$.
Similarly, the set of $\mathbf{k}$-points associated with the finite lattice are given by
```math
\mathbf{k} = \sum_{d=1}^D \left( \frac{\mathtt{K}_d}{L_d} \right) \mathbf{b}_d
```
and then reported in term of the set of integers $\mathtt{K}_d \in [0, L_d)$.

### Correlation Function Reporting Conventions

In addition to reporting the set of integers $\mathtt{R\_d} \ (\mathtt{K\_d})$ used to define correlation functions in position (momentum) space, they are also identified by an ID pair $(\mathtt{*\_ID\_2}, \mathtt{*\_ID\_1})$ specifying the subscripts $\nu$ and $\gamma$. 

### Defined Correlation Functions

In this section we review the various correlation measurements that the [VariationalMC.jl](https://github.com/atanjaro/VariationalMC.jl)
package currently supports.

- `density`: (`ORBITAL_ID`) Measures total density correlation function.
- `spin_z`: (`ORBITAL_ID`) Measures spin-z correlation function.
